# FeatureMentor

FeatureMentor is a prototype configuration tool for feature models. It assists the user throughout the interactive configuration process by providing configuration advice and explaining conflicts, based on soft constraint information.

The tool is deployed as an executable jar file. After downloading and running, you can get started by creating a new Project and defining the Feature Model that it uses. Select the menu option
File/New Project
then
Project/Define feature model
FeatureMentor will ask you to select the feature model file in you local system. This should be an XML file in the same format supported by the S.P.L.O.T. online feature model repository (http://www.splot-research.org/). After selecting it, the feature model should become visible on the left pane of the window. You can save and open the project at a later date using the corresponding options if the file menu. 
Although you can start creating a new configuration right away (Project/New configuration), FeatureMentor was constructed with the idea of providing you assistance during the configuration process by resorting to a set of soft constraints. These constraints can represent things like user constraints or simply desirable properties of any configuration, according to well known domain knowledge. By representing this as soft constraints, rather than hard constraints, you allow overspecification: you do not need to be sure that all such constraints are simultaneously satisfiable, as would be the case if traditional hard constraints were used. Furthermore, rather than just computing an "optimal" configuration that satisfies a certain optimal number of constraints without user intervention (thereby making it impossible for the user to understand what trade offs are possible and how they should be resolved), FeatureMentor will offer advice during the configuration process to help you not only achieving an optimal (though not optimum) configuration, but also explain what conflicts arise during that process and the impact of the different solutions.

To experiment, you can use the provided example: it is the well-known DELL computer feature model, obtained from the S.P.L.O.T. repository and annotated with additional soft constraints. On the right hand side of the screen, you can see the hard constraints at the top and the soft constraints in the middle. These constraints represent the characteristics of a desired computer. For example, the first soft constraint, called someOpticalDrive, suggests that the configuration should include the opticaldrive feature. The second constraint, called opticalDrive, suggests that a dvd/cdrwcombo or bluraydisc should be used. The first constraint is not redundant. Even though satisfaction of the opticalDrive constraint entails satisfaction of the someOpticalDrive constraint, we do not know in advance if the former is possible. (Although the description of the soft constraints is in this case embedded within the feature model description, it is also possible to add them via the interface (Project/Add new soft constraint) or import the soft constraints from a separated file (Project/Import Soft Constraints), allowing the original feature model to be left unchanged).

Starting a new configuration will result in FeatureMentor highlighting two features in blue (windowsvista64bit and mem2gb) and one in red (lessthan400us). All other features are disabled. FeatureMentor has detected that it is impossible to satisfy all constraints. Furthermore, it is now letting the user know that the highlighted features are pivotal, that is, depending on how the user decides to configure one of them, there will be consequences regarding *which* constraints will be satisfied.
The windowsvista64bit feature is highlighted in blue and has a 0% indication next to it. The percentage is a selection suggestion indicator: if <0, then FeatureMentor is suggesting you to deselect it, if >0 than feature mentor is advising selection. If 0, both configuration actions are seen as equally valuable.  The closer this number is in magnitude to 100%, the stronger is the corresponding suggestion is (100% corresponds to the highest degree of certainty - the corresponding cconfiguration action can and should be performed to allow satisfaction of the constraints). The color is a visual indication of the % value (<0 red; 0 blue; >0 green). If the suggestion strength is not 100%, than the feature is conflicted. If windowsvista64bit is highlighted (click on it on the tree view), an explanation of the conflict will be provided in the lower right window:
The feature MUST be selected so that satisfaction of the OS and opticalDrive constraints is made possible, however, it MUST be deselected to allow satisfaction of the priceLowest and processorConstraint. Since all constraints are considered to be equally important (they all have the same priority), it is up to the user to decide on what is the preferrable trade-off.
The lessthan400us feature has a red (negative) suggestion with -34%, so FeatureMentor is asking the user to consider deselecting it. Highlighting that feature will reveal the reason: while it is necessary to select it to satisfy priceLowestPossible, it must be deselected to allow the OS and opticalDrive constraints to be satisfied. With no other information available, FeatureMentor assumes that satisfying two constraints is better than satisfying just one, and correspondingly advises to consider deselection.

Once the user makes a decision, it will impact on subsequent advice and coniguration options. If we follow FeatureMentor's advice and deselect the lessthan400us feature, the windowsvista64bit feature will now have a positive recommendation value. This is because, while originally deselection was required in part to satisfy lessthan400us, the user has now explicitly decided to make an option that makes it impossible to satisfy it. FeatureMentor will not advise the user to revise his options (though he can do that with the undo option if he wishes). The lessthan400us constraint is now no longer satisfiable, so it will not impact further the consifuration process. In this way, there is now at this point only one additional reason for deselecting windowsvista64 (the processor constraint), while the same motivation for selection still exists (the OS and opticaldrive features). Again, FeatureMentor assumes that satisfaction of two constraints is probably better than satisfaction of one constraint, and gives corresponding advice.

The user can continue the configuration process until all features are selected, inspecting at each step the conflicted features and deciding what the best trade-offs are.


Jorge Barreiros (barreiros.jorge@gmail.com)
Researcher@NOVA LINCS
Lecturer@ISEC-IPC
